The main functionality of the Mechatronic system is to provide the user with a series of small activities 
that they can do during extended periods of studying as a form of a break. It is essentially an advanced 
version of the game “Bop-it” requiring the player to do a series of small challenges in a limited amount 
of time. This will allow students to quickly re-energize and avoid distractions during their breaks. 

Since the system is a game, much of its functionality is to measure and detect inputs from the user. It 
does so by using touch sensors, a gyroscopic sensor and a colour sensor which are primarily used to verify 
if the user was able to successfully complete the challenge. The system can be broken down into three 
components, each being an individual mini-game that synchronize in order to produce the overall system. 
Each individual component requires its own measurements, inputs and outputs.

Initially the system will prompt the user to enter the number of rounds that they would like to play (with 
a maximum of four). This feature was developed in order to allow users to play the intended time of their 
break, while ensuring that they do not play for an unreasonable time (as they cannot play more than four 
continuous rounds). The user will input this by pressing the right button on the brick and then using the 
enter button to confirm. The rounds will start by displaying a short “3...2...1…” countdown to notify the 
user that the round has begun. Then the screen will prompt them to do an activity that they must complete 
and then as the user is done the activity they will press the enter button. The robot will make sure that 
the activity was done correctly through the use of the activities respective sensors (elaborated on later)
 and then prompt the next one within the same round. A timer measuring the overall time taken to do all 
activities will make sure that the user completes the round in the allocated time. They will then be 
allocated points for each round and consequent activity they complete.

The first main component is the colour scrambler. It consists of a colour sensor and a motor. The user 
interacts with the component by placing coloured papers in the correct order presented on the main display 
of the EV3 in a given period of time. Once the user has placed the coloured papers in their appropriate 
locations, they will press the enter button to prompt the validation. Validation will occur with the motor 
rotating the colour sensor attachment clockwise at a low power, using motor encoders to stop at each paper, 
sensing the colours and making sure that they are in the correct order. If the colour senses a colour that 
is placed in the work spot, the game will be over. If the colour sensor sense that all the coloured papers 
have been placed senses that all the coloured papers have been placed in the appropriate spot, then the 
system will progress onto the next activity.

The second component is the compass navigator. The main parts required for this component are a gyroscopic 
sensor. The objective of this game is to accurately turn a platform a certain amount of degrees. Within the 
game the person will be prompted a value of 20, 40, or 60 and a direction to turn the platform. The user 
will then rotate the platform to the displayed angle and direction. They will be able to do so, as an 
outline of a compass will be on the platform so that they will be able to visualize the degrees. Once they 
believe that they have finished the game, they will proceed to press the enter button. The robot will then 
validate that they have successfully completed the activity, by using input from the gyro sensor and 
comparing it to the initially outputted value. In order to take into consideration, random error and sensor
 variation the user will be given a tolerance of five degrees. If the value of the gyro sensor is not within 
the tolerance, the game will terminate, however if it is within the desired limit, then the game with 
progress onto the next activity.

The final component of the system is the button game, named “Follow the Leader”. The main parts consist of 
two touch sensors and two motors. The task is to press down on two moving buttons, one on each side of the 
robot, a given amount of times (e.g. Left button three times and right button two times). The screen will 
display a certain combination like the previous one mentioned. The user will then press the buttons in the 
exact combination and order that they are prompted to do so. They will then press the enter button to signal 
that they are complete and the timer will end. To validate that the game has been completed successfully, 
the touch sensor input will verify the user’s actions. If the inputs are the same as the ones displayed on 
the screen at the beginning of the reactivity the game will progress onto the next activity, however if the 
inputs do not match, the game will terminate.

Each of these components will be combined in different configuration in order to make a round. Each subsequent 
round, will be increasingly difficult with more activities to complete with a shorter time allocated to 
completing the round. The robot will recognize the completion of each activity in their respective methods
 outlined above. With a successful completion of every activity in the round, the game will progress onto the 
next round.

There are two instances in which the system will go under shutdown procedure. If a person has successfully 
completed all the rounds the screen will display “YOU WON” along with their score. The display will stay for 
10 seconds in order for the user to be able to read their score and then the system will terminate the game. A 
play again feature was not coded into the shutdown function for the “YOU WIN” condition to make sure students do
 not go over their intended study time. Another instance in which the system will go under shutdown procedure is 
if the user does not complete a round in the allocated time, or does not correctly complete an activity (outlined 
above). The screen will then display “GAME OVER” as well as the user’s current score and then prompt the user if 
they would still like to continue playing.

